Nix/NixOS Requirements and Documentation (#2413)
tauri-apps/tauri-docs: src/content/docs/start/prerequisites.mdx

{/* Note: These are the officially supported linux distributions. */}
{/* If you wish to add another please open an issue to discuss prior to opening a PR */}

:::note

> Using nix/nixos? we have moved nix/nixos to a dedicated section [here](#nixnixos)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Nix/NixOS? we have moved Nix/NixOS to a dedicated section [here](#nixnixos)
```

```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="NixOS">

>     This section has been moved Nix/NixOS to a dedicated section [here](#nixnixos)

Reviewer 2: I'd prefer if you wrap it into a :::info aside, as of now it kinda mixed with the text content right after it. Ofc if you have a better idea than aside it could work.
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8feb3f51-d23d-46e5-8f36-0437f13436cd)

Author: I will do this once I clone it today, I forgotten this pr by accident.

### macOS

:::note

> Using Nix? we have a dedicated section on getting started on nix [here](#nixnixos)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Nix? We now have a dedicated section on getting started with it [here](#nixnixos)
```

Next: [Install Rust](#rust)

### Nix/NixOS

> Using `nix-shell`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a [`shell.nix`](https://nix.dev/tutorials/first-steps/declarative-shell):
```

```sh
with import <nixpkgs> { };
mkShell {
  buildInputs = [
    libiconv
  ] ++ lib.optionals stdenv.isLinux [ gtk3 libsoup_3 webkitgtk_4_1] ++
	lib.optionals stdenv.isDarwin [
		# Only required if your using the npm package `@tauri-apps/cli` inside of your `package.json`
		darwin.apple_sdk.frameworks.WebKit
		# cargo-tauri # only if you want to cargo-tauri 
	];
}

> ```

Reviewer: Fixed a few problems here:

- This is Nix code, not `sh`
- We should be using a [reproducible nixpkgs configuration](https://nix.dev/guides/best-practices#reproducible-nixpkgs-configuration)
- `gtk3` is for Tauri v1, not v2
- `libsoup3` is no longer used
- `glib-networking` is required for a vast majority of apps
- The comment on only requiring the WebKit framework when using the prebuilt binary from NPM is misleading. All Tauri projects need it to build
- `libiconv` isn't required on macOS or Linux to my knowledge -- unless this was introduced in Tauri v2
- `pkg-config` was missing
- A Rust toolchain should be included so you can actually build an app
- `openssl` was missing

The comment next to `cargo-tauri` has also been clarified. It isn't required per-se since it seems the pre-built NPM binary for Linux is completely static, but if this ever changes NixOS *will* have issues

> Downloading and attempting to run a binary on NixOS will almost never work. This is due to hard-coded paths in the executable.
>
> -https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/Packaging/Binaries

```suggestion
```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    config = { };
    overlays = [ ];
  };
in

pkgs.mkShell {
  nativeBuildInputs =
    with pkgs;
    [
      rustc
      cargo
      # Uncomment if `@tauri-apps/cli` doesn't work on your system
      # cargo-tauri
      pkg-config
    ]
    ++ lib.optionalAttrs stdenv.hostPlatform.isLinux [ wrapGAppsHook4 ];

  buildInputs =
    with pkgs;
    [ openssl ]
    ++ lib.optionals stdenv.hostPlatform.isLinux [
      glib-networking
      webkitgtk_4_1
    ]
    ++ lib.optionals stdenv.hostPlatform.isDarwin [
      darwin.apple_sdk.frameworks.WebKit
    ];
}
```
```

:::caution[Experimental]

> Just to note flakes are experimental in nix and may change any time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flakes are [experimental](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/contributing/experimental-features.html) in Nix and may change at any time.
```

:::

> Using `flake.nix`: checkout [eveeifyeve/Tauri-Flake-Templates](https://github.com/Eveeifyeve/Tauri-Flake-Templates) on github to use a community maintained nix flake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer to use Flakes, [Eveeifyeve/Tauri-Flake-Templates](https://github.com/Eveeifyeve/Tauri-Flake-Templates) on GitHub is a community maintained template.
```

Feel free to follow along if your using the flake template as this is the same thing

Next: [Install Rust](#rust)

> 

Reviewer: This doesn't make sense...the template should have everything ready, including Rust and Tauri's dependencies
```suggestion
```

Next: [Install Rust](#rust)

### Nix/NixOS

Using a [`shell.nix`](https://nix.dev/tutorials/first-steps/declarative-shell):

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    config = { };
    overlays = [ ];
  };
in

pkgs.mkShell {
  nativeBuildInputs =
    with pkgs;
    [
      rustc
      cargo
      # Uncomment if `@tauri-apps/cli` doesn't work on your system
      # cargo-tauri
      pkg-config
    ]
    ++ lib.optionalAttrs stdenv.hostPlatform.isLinux [ wrapGAppsHook4 ];

  buildInputs =
    with pkgs;

>     [ openssl ]

Author: @getchoo for some reason `libiconv` is required maybe for plugins?

Reviewer: What plugins specifically? It'd be nice to note it

I also imagine that would be a macOS exclusive dependency; libiconv is hardly ever used on Linux

Author: I would have to test to see which plugins require it.

Author: I will investigate and create a minimal environment.

Author: I will test it once I get a new mac since my system is screwed by liquid damage luckily I use nix so no problems of reinstall apps.

Visit https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install to install `rustup`.

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Nix/NixOS"> 
  Add the following in your buildinputs from [Previous Section](#nixnixos) below to install Rust on nix/NixOS.
  ```nix
  cargo
  rustc
  rustfmt
  ```

</TabItem>

> 

Reviewer: Again, we should just have Rust in the above dev shell and Flake template. It makes no sense to do this manually when every Tauri projects requires it

This is also *very* confusing since the previous section says to follow along with this guide, but this is specifically only referring to the shell.nix above and *not* the Flake?

```suggestion
```

Author: I guess.

Only if you intend to use a JavaScript frontend framework
:::

<Tabs>

> <TabItem label="Linux/macOS/Windows">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

While npm is the default package manager for Node.js, you can also use others like pnpm or yarn. To enable these, run `corepack enable` in your Terminal. This step is optional and only needed if you prefer using a package manager other than npm.

>   </TabItem>
>   <TabItem label="Nix/NixOS">
>   Add the following to your `buildInputs` to install Nodejs:
>   ```nix
>   nodejs # feel free to change the version
>   npm
>   ```
> 
>     While npm is the default package manager for Node.js, you can also use others like pnpm or yarn. To install them look for that package on [nixpkgs](https://search.nixos.org/packages) and add the package above.  This step is optional and only needed if you prefer using a package manager other than npm.
> 
>   </TabItem>
> </Tabs>
> 

Reviewer: I don't think this is worthy of a dedicated section. It would be much better to just have comments in the dev shell shown above again, as projects will always need a version of Nodejs and a package manager
```suggestion
```

### Android

:::caution[Nix/NixOS]
Android Studio only supports Linux Nix/NixOS.
If you are using Nix on darwin you could try the [homebrew route through nix-darwin](https://daiderd.com/nix-darwin/manual/index.html#opt-homebrew.brews) to install Android Studio.
:::

1. Download and install [Android Studio from the Android Developers website](https://developer.android.com/studio) or if you are using Nix/NixOS by adding the package to your system `android-studio`.

> 

Reviewer: This *really* doesn't need Nix/NixOS specific instructions. If you're using either, I am sure you know how to install a package. We don't need to explain that here

Author: Your right, Resolved.

- Android SDK Build-Tools
- Android SDK Command-line Tools

> /electing "Show Package Details" in the SDK Manager enables the installation of older package versions. Only install older versions if necessary, as they may introduce compatibility issues or security risks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selecting "Show Package Details" in the SDK Manager enables the installation of older package versions. Only install older versions if necessary, as they may introduce compatibility issues or security risks.
```

Author: Ops my mistake.

rustup target add aarch64-linux-android armv7-linux-androideabi i686-linux-android x86_64-linux-android
```

# Nix/Nixos

Add the following to `buildInputs` to install the tools/Android Studio(Linux only):

```nix
android-studio # Linux only
android-tools
```

> 

Reviewer: See above

I also don't think this is the only thing that's required? The regular instructions tell you to add multiple targets to rustup for cross compilation; only installing Android Studio does not do this.
```suggestion
```

Author: Rust by default adds these targets but It seems like android studio is not required in this case.

In nixpkgs there is something called `androidenv` which is under `pkgs/development/mobile/androidenv` which has the required stuff needed.

Reviewer: > Rust by default adds these targets

It does not. These are cross compile targets, which you would need to use `pkgsCross` for

> In nixpkgs there is something called androidenv which is under pkgs/development/mobile/androidenv which has the required stuff needed.

It supplies the Android SDK and NDK. Nothing else

Author: Which is needed for to build android?

Reviewer: The Android SDK, NDK, and Rust cross compilation targets are all required

Author: Which androidenv supplies with SDK & NDK is there but adding the targets would a. require something like fenix or b. require rustup.

Reviewer: Which is why I said

> I also don't think this is the only thing that's required?

But again, this section can probably just be removed. Nix(OS) users should know how to install Android Studio and add Rust targets. They can also follow along with the rustup instructions verbatim anyways

Author: True, I guess your right.

If you run into any issues during installation be sure to check the [Troubleshooting Guide](/develop/debug/) or reach out on the [Tauri Discord](https://discord.com/invite/tauri).

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="Nix">

> Add the following to `buildInputs` under darwin section to install 

Reviewer: This section is a *but* more informative since the docs don't already mention a specific package to install for Nix,, so it's fine IMO

```suggestion
Add the following to your development shell's `buildInputs`
```
